# Unit 2 Lesson 5: Movement

Now that we have all our sprites prepared, we are ready to start animating them. A game with only sprites is pretty boring right? Nothing moves and everything just stays where it is. Let's give our sprites some life shall we?

First off, we should have a start point for our sprites. This start point is when all the sprites will start moving and the game starts. The green flag above the game preview is the start of our game, and it's also Scratch's prebuilt start point. In order to run code when the game is started though, we will need to use a code block. Let's start with coding the ball shall we?

First, click on our "Ball" sprite to create code specifically for the "Ball" sprite. Under the events tab at the left side of the screen, there is a "when (green flag) clicked" codeblock. This will run the code below every time the green flag is pressed. Now, what do we want the ball to do when the program starts? Well, the ball has to move in a direction right? In order to make it move, we will use a code block under "Motion" that says "change x by (10)" and "change y by (10)". If you put these blocks on top of each other and under our starting code block and click run, you will see that the ball has moved 10 spaces in the positive x direction and 10 spaces in the positive y direction (remember the graph from last lesson).

Only moving once isn't exactly what we want right? We want the ball to keep moving until the game ends. Having a program repeat itself is called a loop, and we will need to make a loop in such a way so that the ball is constantly moving. In order to do this, we will use the "repeat until" code block under the "Control" section. The "repeat until" loop will run the code inside until the condition in the condition provided is met. For now, let's make it so that the game will end when the spacebar is pressed. To do this, we will used the "key (space) pressed?" under the "Sensing" tab. Drag this block into the condition slot in the "repeat until" block to stop the block when the spacebar is pressed. Then, move our previous two blocks into the loop (with the start block at the top) and start the program. If done correctly, the ball should move up and to the right until you press the spacebar or the ball hits the corner. Congratulations! You have animated your first component.

You may notice, though, that every time you restart the program, you'll have to drag the ball away from the corner, and that gets annoying doesn't it? Let's make it so that the ball returns to the middle every time it hits either the right side or the left side of the game screen. To do so, we'll tell the program to ask itself whether it's at the right or left border of the screen using something called a "conditional". A conditional runs a code when a condition is met, and a common example and the example we will be using is the "if else" statement which runs the block of code within the "if" section when the condition given is met and runs the code block under "else" in every other case. The "if else" statement can be found under the "Control" section. Drag an "if else" code block into our loop and put the movement blocks into the "else" block. In the "if" block, we will be doing a bit of math. Now, when we said that the ball touches the left or right edges, what we really mean is that the x position of the ball reaches 240 or -240. We can check this by comparing whether the absolute value of the ball's x position is equal to 240. Under the operators tab, you will find a "() = (50)" block and a "abs of ()" block, and under the "Motion" section, we will find a "x position" block that represents the x position of our current sprite and "go to x:(0) y:(0)" block that moves the sprite to a certain (x, y) coordinate. Can you create the condition which makes the ball return to (0, 0) when the ball's x coordinate reaches 240 or -240? Try it yourself, and the answer will be down below.

Have you tried it? We have attached an example of our solution below, but keep in mind our solution isn't the only solution. You can use our problem if you get stuck, but not before you tried it yourself. Now, ready?

> Insert image of our code block.

Now that we've made the ball move, let's move the paddles. The paddle is different from the ball in that we can actually control the vertical movement of the paddles. How do we do this though? First off, click left paddle sprite to create code specifically for the paddle (You'll notice that the code we previously wrote disappears, but don't worry! It's stored in the "Ball" sprite.) Then, we will use the same start code block (the green flag) and the same repeat until to run the program until the spacebar is pressed. The left paddle will be controlled by the "w" and the "s" keys (w moves the paddle up and s moves the paddle down). We also want the paddle to stay on screen, so the paddle won't move up (when "w" is pressed) or down (when "s" is pressed) when the paddle is at a certain y position. To do so, the blocks we will be using are the "if" block, the "change y b ()" block, the "key () pressed" block, the "() and ()" block (is true if both slots are true and returns false if otherwise), and the ">" and "<" blocks which compares two values. Are you able to put these together to make move the paddles when "w" and "s" are pressed?

Our solution is down below.

> Insert image of our code block.

The good news is that we can just copy this code block over to our "Right Paddle" because the code is the same, but be sure the change the "w" and "s" key to "up arrow" and "down arrow". Now you are able to move both paddles!

In this lesson, we were able to move both paddles and the ball. In the next lesson, we will see how we can make these sprites interact with each other!